

=== Page 1 ===

IT3021 – Data Warehousing & Business Intelligence
Year 3 Semester 1 & 2
Lab Sheet 03
1. Introduction to the Worksheet
In the previous worksheet, we configured the environment to work on & designed the data
warehouse architecture including the staging environment. We will continue from there in
this work sheet by designing the ETL to extract data from the source systems and load them
into the staging database, and then, extract from the staging database, transform and load
them to the data warehouse.
2. Tools Required
Below tools should be available to continue with this tutorial:
• SQL Server Data Tools
• SQL Server Management Studio
3. Creating the SSIS Project
Before starting with ETL, lets create an SSIS Project using Visual Studio Data Tools.
1. Open Visual Studio Data Tools in ‘Administrator’ mode.
2. Create an Integration Services project in the folder you created in C drive to store the
‘CustomerAddress.txt’ file.
( C:\SLIIT Data Warehouse Solution Tutorial\SSISTutorial<Student Number>\).
3. Once the solution is created, you will see a similar folder structure in Solution
Explorer.


=== Page 2 ===

4. Rename the ‘Package.dtsx’ to ‘SLIIT_Retail_Load_Staging.dtsx’.
5. Copy and paste the ETL document sheets you prepared to the solution folder.
6. Right click on the solution name in Solution Explorer and select Add à Existing Item…
7. Select the data mapping excel file and attach it to the solution.
8. Double click and open the file to make sure it is attached properly.
Read more to understand the items, tabs & other options available in the SSIS solution
interface to understand what each of them do.
4. Extracting Data from Source Database
The first step of the SSIS ETL process is the extraction of data from source systems. In the
scenario discussed in practical sessions, we have two data sources (SQL database source &
addresses text file). First, let’s consider the SQL Server database with below tables:
• IndividualCustomer
• Product
• ProductSubCategory
• ProductCategory
• SalesOrderDetails
• SalesOrderHeader
Let’s first extract all the data in these tables to staging area tables. Right now, we do not have
any staging tables, but only the staging database, ‘SLIIT_Retail_Staging’. We will create them
through SSIS. For each source table, we will have a separate staging table in the staging
database. Let’s start with customer data.
1. Double click on ‘SLIIT Retail Load Staging.dtsx’ file to open the design surface if it is
not already open.
2. Note that there are multiple options in the SSIS Toolbox. Read more to understand
what each item does.
3. First, we need to extract data from the source tables. To do so, drag and drop a Data
Flow Task item to the Control Flow area.
4. Right click the Data Flow Task and select Rename and rename the item as ‘Extract
Customer Data to Staging’.


=== Page 3 ===

5. Double click on the ‘Extract Customer Data to Staging’ to configure the data flow task.
6. On the Data Flow design surface, Drag and drop an OLE DB Source component from
SSIS Toolbox under Other Sources.
7. Double click OLE DB Source to open the OLE DB Source Editor dialog box.
8. Click New button to create a new database connection. In the Configure OLE DB
Connection Manager click on the New button to create a new connection.
9. Provide the Server Name, provide credentials to log on to the server (SQL Server
Authentication is recommended over Windows Authentication as once scheduled,
scheduler cannot access windows user credentials). Select the database as
‘SLIIT_RetailSourceDB’. Finally, click on Test Connection to check the connection
attempt.
10. If the attempt is successful, click on OK button to return to the OLE DB Source Editor.
11. In OLE DB Source Editor, select the ‘IndividualCustomer’ table from the table
dropdown.
12. Click on Columns and make sure that all the columns are selected and click on the OK
button to complete the configuration.
Now the Data Flow surface should look similar to below image:
13. Now to configure the destination, drag and drop an OLE DB Destination item from
SSIS Toolbox under Other Destinations and link the OLE DB Source with OLE DB
Destination item using the blue color line.
14. Right click on OLE DB Destination and click Rename to rename the item as ‘Load data
to Customer Staging table’.
15. Double click to open the OLE DB Destination Editor.


=== Page 4 ===

16. The connection manager shows your source database. Since we are planning to load
data to the ‘SLIIT_Retail_Staging’ database, create a new connection to point to the
staging database following step 9.
17. Since the staging table is not yet created, click on the New button to open the Create
Table window.
18. Rename the table name as ‘StgCustomer’.
19. Click on the OK button to create the table in the staging database.
20. Click Mappings and make sure all the fields are mapped to the destination staging
table.
21. Click on OK to complete the configuration.
At this stage, if we run the package, it will extract the data and store in the staging table.
However, if we run the process multiple times, the staging table will be repeatedly loaded
with customer data without truncating the data already available in the table. To handle this,
do the following:
1. Click on Event Handlers.
2. Under the Executable dropdown, select the ‘Extract Customer Data to Staging’ and
click OK.


=== Page 5 ===

3. Select OnPreExecute from the Event Handler drop down and click on the link on the
event handler body to create an ‘OnPreExecute’ event for the data flow task.
NOTE: Executables are components in Control Flow area. Against these executables,
events can’t be triggered on different conditions such as OnPreExcute,
OnPostExecute, OnError.
4. On the event handler design surface, drag and drop an Execute SQL Task item from
the SSIS Toolbox and rename it as ‘Truncate Customer Staging Table’.
5. Double click to open Execute SQL Task Editor.
6. In the editor window, specify the Connection by selecting ‘SLIIT_Retail_Staging’ as the
database.
7. In the same window, use the below code for the SQL Statement to truncate the table.
truncate table dbo.StgCustomer
8. Click on OK button to complete the configuration.
9. Follow the same process for other source tables to delete the content in the target
table before it is being loaded with data extracted from the source table. For each
table, add a separate Data Flow Task and configure it accordingly.
a. All the Data Flow Tasks should be connected to each other in a serial way in
order to execute them in a serial order.


=== Page 6 ===

NOTE: Loading data from ‘CustomerAddress.txt’ to staging database is discussed in the next
section. Address data should go to a separate staging table. Address and customer data are
combined when loading them from staging database to the data warehouse.
You may use following names as necessary when loading other tables from source database
to staging database.
Source Table Data Flow Task OLE DB Staging Table Event Handler
Destination Task SQL Task
IndividualCustomer Extract Load data to StgCustomer Truncate
Customer Data Customer Staging Customer Staging
to Staging table Table
Product Extract Product Load data to StgProduct Truncate Product
Data to Staging Product Staging Staging Table
table
ProductSubCategory Extract Product Load data to StgProductSubCategory Truncate Product
Sub Category Product Sub Sub Category
Data to Staging Category Staging Staging Table
table
ProductCategory Extract Product Load data to StgProductCategory Truncate Product
Category Data Product Category Category Staging
to Staging Staging table Table
SalesOrderDetails Extract Order Load data to Order StgOrderDetails Truncate Order
Details Data to Details Staging Details Staging
Staging table Table
SalesOrderHeader Extract Order Load data to Order StgOrderHeader Truncate Order
Header Data to Header Staging Header Staging
Staging table Table
When you have completed up to this point, Control Flow design area should look like below:


=== Page 7 ===

5. Extracting Data from Text File
To extract data from ‘CustomerAddress.txt’ file, we will use a Flat File Source in SSIS Toolbox
under Other Sources.
1. Drag and drop a Data Flow Task item to the Control Flow area and connect it.
2. Right click the Data Flow Task and select Rename and rename the item as ‘Extract
Customer Address Data to Staging’.
3. Double click on the ‘Extract Customer Address Data to Staging’ to configure the data
flow task.
4. Drag and drop a Flat File Source.
5. Double click on Flat File Source task to open the File Source Editor.
6. In the Flat File Source Editor, click the New button and provide a connection to the
text file by giving the path to the file.


=== Page 8 ===

7. Select the Format as Delimited.
8. Click on Columns to view and understand whether it seperates the columns
accurately. Make sure the Row delimiter is set to {CR}{LF} and Column Delimiter is set
to Tab {t}.
9. Click on Advanced option to configure the data type for each column.
10. Select CustomerID column and set its data type to Numeric [DT_NUMERIC].
11. Set the data type of all the other fields to Unicode String [DT_WSTR].
Read more to understand the difference between String [DT_STR] and Unicode String
[DT_WSTR].
10. Set the OutputColumnWidth for text column as follows.
a. Address Type – 50
b. Address Line 1 & 2 – 60
c. City – 30
d. State Province Name – 50
e. Postal Code – 15
f. Country Region – 50
11. Click OK to complete the configuration.
12. Check the box that says Retail null values from the source as null values in the data
flow. (Change this and see what happens when loading data!)
13. Click OK to complete the configuration.
14. Add an OLE DB Destination task, rename it as ‘Load data to Customer Addresses
Staging table’ and configure it the way it was done previously. Please remember to
change the data type of CustomerID to INT when creating the table. You may name
the staging table as ‘StgCustomerAddresses’.
15. After configuring you might see an error as below.
a. If so, set the value of DefaultCodePage to 65001 and set the value of
AlwaysUseDefaultCodePage property to True (these are properties of ‘Load
data to Customer Addresses Staging table’ task).


=== Page 9 ===

16. Go to Event Handlers tab and configure the OnPreExecute handler to truncate the
customer addresses staging table. You may rename the Execute SQL Task item as
‘Truncate Customer Addresses Staging Table’.
When you have completed up to this point, Control Flow design area should look like below:


=== Page 10 ===

6. Data Profiling
Since we have source data in our staging tables, now we can use the staging table data to
analyze how the data looks like to determine what type of transformations we need to
perform on the data.
Create a new package and rename it as ‘Data_Profiling.dtsx’.
1. Right click on SSIS Packages and select New SSIS Package and rename it as ‘Data
Profiling.dtsx’.
2. In the Control Flow of ‘Data Profiling Pack.dtsx’, drag and drop a Data Profiling Task
and double click to open Data Profiling Task Editor window.
3. Click on Quick Profile button to open up Single Table Quick Profile Form.
4. Click on New button and create a connection to ‘SLIIT_Retail_Staging’.
5. From the Table or View dropdown, select ‘StgCustomer’ table.
6. Select all the check boxes and click on OK button to complete the configuration.
7. Back in Data Profiling Task Editor window go to General page.
8. For the Destination, select <New File Connection…>.
9. In the File Connection Manager Editor window, select Create File as the value for
Usage type and provide the file path to any location as you prefer and click OK to
complete the configuration.
10. Save the package and right clicking on the ‘Data_Profiling.dtsx’ and select Execute
Package to execute ‘Data_Profiling.dtsx’ package in order to profile the customer
data.
11. Once the package is executed, double click the Data Profiling Task and click on Open
Profile Viewer… button to view the output.
Read more on how to profile data and how to understand the data analysis. Do the same for
all staging tables to analyze the data by yourselves.